Fewer people in Missouri are vaccinated for HPV than in most other states nationwide. And that could open the door for deadly HPV-related cancers.

Human Papillomavirus, or HPV, is the most common sexually transmitted virus. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, nearly all sexually active men and women will get at least one form of HPV at some point in their lives. 

According to the CDC, Missouri’s rate of vaccination for both men and women has been increasing over the last 10 years. But the state’s rate is still the eighth lowest in the nation. 

And that lack of vaccination at a young age can have major consequences later in life, said Mark Hunter, director of gynecologic oncology at MU Health.

“It continues to baffle me that these entirely preventable cancers keep rolling in the door and they do so in all age groups, so we have people in their 20s, 30s, 40s and even in their 80s who are continuing to present with either early, or more often, late-stage cervical cancer,” he said.

The CDC found that about 91% of all cervical cancer cases could be attributed to HPV. Even other types of cancer — including vaginal and vulvar cancers in women — have had a majority of cases attributed to HPV.

Even among men, there’s a likelihood of getting cancers like penile cancer, though at a much lower rate. Only a little over 63% of penile cancer can be attributed to HPV, according to the CDC. 

The lower rate of cancer in men isn’t attributed to a higher rate of vaccination, though. In 2018, about 67% of girls in Missouri had at least one HPV vaccination, but only about 56% of boys had gotten the same vaccination.

Hunter said the fact that men usually aren’t as susceptible to HPV-related symptoms and cancers may be part of why the HPV vaccination rate is so much lower in men. But just because a man may not be showing symptoms from the virus doesn’t mean he can’t pass it on to someone else.

“It’s pretty unlikely you're going to get penile cancer, but this will protect your future partners from cervical cancer,” he said. “And you know, that's a harder sell.”

Hunter said that one of the biggest reasons parents may not be getting their children vaccinated is not because of a fear that it’ll increase the likelihood of their child being sexually active but because their doctors and nurses may not bring it up with them. He thinks many health care providers may be worried about making the parents uncomfortable, when parents are usually interested in learning more. 

“You have a tendency not to bring it up or to bring it up once briefly and not to bring it up again,” Hunter said. “And what the data shows is that parents are very much interested in this vaccine, and are very much willing to talk to providers about it, and I just don't think they're getting those opportunities to do so.”

One study by Johns Hopkins Medicine found that between 2010 and 2016, parents citing their assumption that their child wasn’t sexually active as the reason for not vaccinating decreased by nearly half in both boys and girls. 

The study also emphasizes the fact that physicians should inform parents of potential health risks if they forgo their child’s vaccination. 

To Hunter, the importance of being vaccinated and understanding future risks goes beyond informing parents — there needs to be more of a focus on communicating with the children that may be affected in the future. Because the price of a vaccination is a small one to pay.

“I would suggest that prevention via vaccine is a bargain,” he said. “For the health system and for the for the nation as a whole.”

